---
title: CS 240 Course Overview
---

# {{page.title}}

In the Computer Science core curriculum, CS+X students have an unique choice between having extra time/space to take 400-level electives or to take additional 200-level coursework.

<hr>


## What is CS 240?

**CS 240: Introduction to Computer Systems** is a core Computer Science course that designed as an alternative to the (CS 233 + CS 241) sequence of courses to provide you a strong foundation in computer architecture and systems programming in a single semester.  In addition to covering the primary topics found in both CS 233 and CS 241, CS 240 provides you a deep introduction to cloud-based infrastructure from a cloud-first prospective, covering systems from the point of view of running platforms, infrastructure, and services (PaaS, IaaS, and SaaS).

<hr>

## What topics are covered in CS 233, CS 240, and CS 241?

CS 233 covers computer architecture (ex: bit operations, circuits, caching, assembly, and the hardware-software interface).  CS 241 covers computer systems (ex: memory, processes/threads, synchronization, IPC, networking, scheduling, and security).

CS 240 covers the majority of topics covered in CS 241, gives a broad overview of the topics in CS 233, and spends several weeks on cloud-scale systems.  Students in CS 240 and CS 241 both complete challenging MPs (ex: both courses to the classic "malloc MP").

<hr>

## What are the advantages of taking CS 240?

CS 240 may have topics that better fit your interests (ex: microservices, cloud, containers, etc) than CS 233 + CS 241.

Additionally, CS 240 is 3 credit hours (instead of 8 credit hours for CS 233 + CS 241).  The difference in five credit hours means you must take **two additional CS electives of your choice** that you can choose based on your specific interest.

<hr>

## What are the disadvantages of taking CS 240?

If you take CS 240, you cannot earn credit for CS 241.

Additionally, there are a few specific computer architecture and systems that require CS 233 and/or CS 241 as they build on the advanced topics covered in those courses not covered in CS 240.  (See list below.)

<hr>

## What courses can you take after CS 240?

Almost all 400-level CS courses are open to you after completing CS 240.  In general, CS has eight "focus areas" and you will be completely prepared for six of the focus areas with CS 240.  Only the architecture (CS 233) and systems (CS 241) focus areas are limited to you if you choose CS 240.

- Prepared for **ALL** "Software Foundations" Focus Area courses
- Prepared for **ALL** "Algorithms and Models of Computation" Focus Area courses
- Prepared for **ALL** "Intelligence and Big Data" Focus Area courses
- Prepared for **ALL** "Human and Social Impact" Focus Area courses
- Prepared for **ALL** "Media" Focus Area courses
- Prepared for **ALL** "Scientific, Parallel, and High Performance Computing" Focus Area courses
- Prepared for **some** "Distributed Systems, Networking, and Security" Focus Area courses
- Prepared for **some** "Machines" Focus Area courses

Some of the courses from these last two focus areas are in the following list.  If you think you may want to take any of these specific courses, you should NOT take CS 240:

- CS 423: Operating Systems Design requires CS 241 (or ECE 391)
- CS 425: Distributed Systems requires CS 241 (or ECE 391)
- CS 431: Embedded Systems requires CS 241 (or ECE 391)
- CS 433: Computer System Organization requires CS 233
- CS 434: Mobile Computing & Application requires CS 241 (or ECE 391)
- CS 439: Wireless Networks requires CS 241 (or ECE 391)

<hr>

## Questions?

You can explore the three websites for the three courses to see what course interests you the most:

- CS 233: [https://cs233.github.io/](https://cs233.github.io/)
- CS 240: [https://courses.grainger.illinois.edu/CS240/](https://courses.grainger.illinois.edu/CS240/)
- CS 241: [http://cs241.cs.illinois.edu/](http://cs241.cs.illinois.edu/)

Additionally, I'd be happy to answer any questions if you e-mail me at waf@illinois.edu.












The choice is between

- Taking both CS 233: Computer Architecture (4 CR) **and** CS 241: System Programming (4 CR),
**OR**
- Taking CS 240: Introduction to Computer Systems (3 CR) **and** two 400-level electives (6 CR).




