---
layout: default
title: Spring 2021 Projects
permalink: /sp2021-projects/
---


## Course Assistant for CS 240

CS 240 has grown larger than anyone expected (from 13 last semester to 50 this semester 🎉) -- so there's a new opportunity to bring on a few more CAs to course staff.  If you (1): are interested in helping develop one of the most interesting new CS core courses and (2): have completed and have strong grades in (both CS 233 and CS 241) or CS 240, it would be amazing to have them apply here: [https://course-assistants.cs.illinois.edu/course/cs-240-introduction-to-computer-systems-spring-202](https://course-assistants.cs.illinois.edu/course/cs-240-introduction-to-computer-systems-spring-202).

*(We are planning to send interview invites out on/around Jan 31, 2021.)*


## Data Visualizations -- Overview

Do you remember "Bardeen Quad" (the space south of Grainger Library, often just called "Grainger Quad") was all torn up before the lockdown?  That project is all finished and the quad is back to looking amazing!  What they did was install a bunch of geothermal wells that will be used to offset the energy use of the new building that's being built next to Grainger. 

My theme for visualizations in 2021 is "Planet Earth" to focus on the environment, environmental impact, everything related to our one and only planet.  As part of that, I have a few projects planned including working on gathering live energy data from those geothermal wells (and other sites, like the solar on top of the ECE building) and create a visualization that tells the story of the impact these 100% green technologies are having towards making UIUC carbon zero.

There are other projects planned around the "Planet Earth" theme and additional visualizations that impact Illinois and beyond.

*(Some projects may not start until a few weeks into the semester.)*


### Interested?

If you are a sophomore or junior (or outstanding first-year, particularly if they're already in CS 225) and interesting in working on this, please introduce yourself!  Send me an e-mail letting me know:

1. Who you are (name, major, etc),
2. Include any visualization work you've done (or visualization skills you know, like d3.js or p5.js),
3. Include a link to your github so I can nerd out checking out code/projects you've done,
4. Other things you're involved in (ex: you're also part of ACM / WCS / ReflectionsProjections / etc), and finally
4. Attach an unofficial transcript so I can know where you are in the CS program and if you've taken any data or visualization-focused courses (ex: CS 467, etc).

Thanks!! :)

